Migration guide for Persistent FSM to typed persistence (#27336)
akka/akka: akka-docs/src/main/paradox/persistence-fsm.md

@@@ warning

> Persistent FSM is no longer actively developed and will be replaced by @ref[Akka Typed Persistence](typed/persistence.md). It is not advised

Reviewer: s/Akka Typed Persistence/Akka Persistence Typed/

> to build new applications with Persistent FSM. Existing users of Persistent FSM @ref[should migrate](#migration-to-eventsourcedbehavior). 

Reviewer: also link to this from the 2.5->2.6 migration guide

`applyEvent` method.

## Migration to EventSourcedBehavior

Persistent FSMs can be represented using @ref[Persistence Typed](typed/persistence.md). The data stored by Persistence FSM can be read by an @apidoc[EventSourcedBehavior]

> using a snapshot adapter and an event adapter. The adapters are required as Persistent FSM doesn't store snapshots and user data directly, it wraps them in 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using a snapshot adapter and an event adapter. The adapters are required because Persistent FSM doesn't store snapshots and user data directly, but wraps them in 
```

internal types that include state transition information.

Before reading the migration guide it is advised to understand [Persistence Typed](typed/persistence.md). 

### Migration steps

1. Modify or create new commands to include `replyTo` @apidoc[akka.actor.typed.ActorRef]
1. Typically persisted events will remain the same
1. Create an `EventSourcedBehavior` that mimics the old `PersistentFSM`
1. Replace any state timeouts with `Behaviors.withTimers` either hard coded or stored in the state
1. Add an @apidoc[akka.persistence.typed.EventAdapter] to convert state transition events added by `PersistentFSM` into private events or filter them
1. If snapshots are used add a @apidoc[akka.persistence.typed.SnapshotAdapter] to convert PersistentFSM snapshots into the `EventSourcedBehavior`s `State`

The following is the shopping cart example above converted to an `EventSourcedBehavior`. 

> The new commands, note the replyTo field for getting the current cart.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new commands, note the `replyTo` field for getting the current cart.
```

The last step is the adapters that will allow the new @apidoc[EventSourcedBehavior] to read the old data:

Scala
:  @@snip [PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationSpec.scala](/akka-persistence-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/persistence/typed/PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationSpec.scala) { #event-adapter }

Java
:  @@snip [PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationCompileOnlyTest.java](/akka-persistence-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/persistence/typed/PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationCompileOnlyTest.java) { #event-adapter }

The snapshot adapter needs to adapt an internal type of PersistentFSM so a helper function is provided to build the @apidoc[SnapshotAdapter]:

Scala
:  @@snip [PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationSpec.scala](/akka-persistence-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/persistence/typed/PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationSpec.scala) { #snapshot-adapter }

Java
:  @@snip [PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationCompileOnlyTest.java](/akka-persistence-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/persistence/typed/PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationCompileOnlyTest.java) { #snapshot-adapter }

That concludes all the steps to allow an @apidoc[EventSourcedBehavior] to read a `PersistentFSM`'s data. Once the new code has been running

> you can not roll back as the PersistentFSM will not be able to read data written by Persistence Typed. This means that if using persistence

Reviewer 2: Do we want to add an entry in the migration guide or https://github.com/akka/akka/blob/master/akka-docs/src/main/paradox/additional/rolling-updates.md for this? IDK.

Reviewer 2: I see you did below :-)

`applyEvent` method.

## Migration to EventSourcedBehavior

Persistent FSMs can be represented using @ref[Persistence Typed](typed/persistence.md). The data stored by Persistence FSM can be read by an @apidoc[EventSourcedBehavior]
using a snapshot adapter and an event adapter. The adapters are required as Persistent FSM doesn't store snapshots and user data directly, it wraps them in 
internal types that include state transition information.

Before reading the migration guide it is advised to understand [Persistence Typed](typed/persistence.md). The steps to migrate are:

1. Modify or create new commands to include replyTo @apidoc[akka.actor.typed.ActorRef]
1. Typically persisted events will remain the same
1. Create an `EventSourcedBehavior` that mimics the old `PersistentFSM`
1. Add an @apidoc[akka.persistence.typed.EventAdapter] to convert state transition events added by `PersistentFSM` into private events or filter them
1. If snapshots are used add a @apidoc[akka.persistence.typed.SnapshotAdapter] to convert PersistentFSM snapshots into the `EventSourcedBehavior`s `State`

Follows is the shopping cart example above converted to an `EventSourcedBehavior`. 

> The new commands, note the replyTo field got getting the current cart.

Reviewer: got getting?

Author: for :)

`applyEvent` method.

## Migration to EventSourcedBehavior

Persistent FSMs can be represented using @ref[Persistence Typed](typed/persistence.md). The data stored by Persistence FSM can be read by an @apidoc[EventSourcedBehavior]
using a snapshot adapter and an event adapter. The adapters are required as Persistent FSM doesn't store snapshots and user data directly, it wraps them in 
internal types that include state transition information.

Before reading the migration guide it is advised to understand [Persistence Typed](typed/persistence.md). The steps to migrate are:

1. Modify or create new commands to include replyTo @apidoc[akka.actor.typed.ActorRef]
1. Typically persisted events will remain the same
1. Create an `EventSourcedBehavior` that mimics the old `PersistentFSM`
1. Replace any state timeouts with `Behaviors.withTimers` either hard coded or stored in the state
1. Add an @apidoc[akka.persistence.typed.EventAdapter] to convert state transition events added by `PersistentFSM` into private events or filter them
1. If snapshots are used add a @apidoc[akka.persistence.typed.SnapshotAdapter] to convert PersistentFSM snapshots into the `EventSourcedBehavior`s `State`

> Follows is the shopping cart example above converted to an `EventSourcedBehavior`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is the shopping cart example above, converted to an `EventSourcedBehavior`. 
```

Scala
:  @@snip [PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationSpec.scala](/akka-persistence-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/persistence/typed/PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationSpec.scala) { #state }

Java
:  @@snip [PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationCompileOnlyTest.java](/akka-persistence-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/persistence/typed/PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationCompileOnlyTest.java) { #state }

The command handler has a separate section for each of the PersistentFSM's states: 

Scala
:  @@snip [PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationSpec.scala](/akka-persistence-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/persistence/typed/PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationSpec.scala) { #command-handler }

Java
:  @@snip [PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationCompileOnlyTest.java](/akka-persistence-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/persistence/typed/PersistentFsmToTypedMigrationCompileOnlyTest.java) { #command-handler }

Note that there is no explicit support for state timeout as with PersistentFSM but the same behavior can be achieved
using `Behaviors.withTimers`. If the timer is the same for all events then it can be hard coded, otherwise the
old PersistentFSM timeout can be taken from the `StateChangeEvent` in the event adapter and is also available when

> constructing a `SnapshotAdapter`. This can be added to an internal event and then be stored in the `State`. Care

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
constructing a `SnapshotAdapter`. This can be added to an internal event and then stored in the `State`. Care
```
